---
layout: post
title: "Revisiting Lolita and Berkeley"
description: "Let these details not slip away in a haze, like these past months have."
category: articles
date: 2020-09-12
tags: [essay]
image:
  feature: "https://i.pinimg.com/originals/fd/79/58/fd795869c940ac1e229abab07ced0916.jpg"
---

Graduation has come and gone, and for a while, I thought that I would write about that, the undeniable injustice of my last year of college snatched away by a pandemic, and the flurry and stress of my tearful, face-masked exodus from Berkeley back to Singapore. However, it is now, strangely, July. An entire three months has feverishly— thankfully, not literally— slipped by, since returning to my family and childhood home. With all the time that has passed, I feel like I don’t have the requisite passionate grief to write my imagined sentimental essay titled, something like “Goodbye, Berkeley,” or “Why God, Why.” Instead, I’ve acclimated to the fact that, just like that— unceremoniously, one might say, without [a] ceremony— I’m a college graduate. I’ve acclimated to the reality that, in less than two months, I’ll be entering that long and intimidating stage of life, the “nine-to-five” grind. In the current state of the world, I’ve found that what once was shocking, is no longer, and I guess, without knowing it, I’ve adopted that credo, Vonnegut put it best, “So it goes.”

Netflix and Tiktok, come down to center stage! Writing, you can wait. I wanted to passively absorb content in peace, intravenously, while my corporeal form rotted into my mattress, my flesh and cotton fibers decaying and enmeshing and becoming one, so that bed and I would become physically inseparable. I would’ve gotten away with it, too, if it weren’t for you meddling… Yale University free online course offerings.

In Yale’s Spring 2008 course archives, I found “The American Novel Since 1945,” a class taught by professor Amy Hungerford. You might say that she re-ignited my “hunger for” (ha) actively engaging with content. Her two lectures on Vladimir Nabokov’s Lolita caught my eye. I had previously taken a Nabokov class at Berkeley, with professor Eric Naiman, and loved it to death. Listening to Hungerford dissecting Lolita, retracing the well-worn topics that Naiman had covered, as well as extending, in her palms, gleaming new gems, it all transported me back, oh-so-willingly, to college…

The sun is shining in Berkeley, California— as it always is, when I imagine myself back on campus. There is something special, I maintain, about the quality of sunshine in the Bay. I swear, I photosynthesize on exclusively that sunlight. Ten minutes. I have ten minutes to get from Evans Hall, voted the ugliest building on campus (also professionally evaluated as the least earthquake-safe), to Barrows Hall: less ugly, more windows, hotter students. My sneakers pound a swift, staccato rhythm down the stairs. I duck behind a boy with a dirty backpack, who pushes open the doors, and when the crisp spring air hits us, buffeting us from all directions, one cannot help but inhale and let out a deep, delighted sigh.

I stroll down the concrete drive leading out of the Hearst Mining Circle area, out to verdant Memorial Glade. Angling strategically, I snake past other students, who in turn, forge their own paths and plans in the chaotic thrumming of the 10 minutes between class periods. Walking even faster now, but still wanting to savor the morning splendor, I walk down the pebbled staircase, past the Faculty House, all dark wood and moss. Barrows in sight, I run in haste, push open the door at the back of the classroom— a shortcut! And here, finally, is Nabokov class. The desks, nonsensically arranged, unlike those in my data science classes, contained scattered clusters, anthropological signals that perhaps group work had transpired in the previous class. Again, I’d like to repeat: everyone in this course was weirdly hot.

Sitting a breath away from a girl with curly dark hair tied back with a red-and-white, spotted bandana, I settle into my seat, and turn my attention to Professor Naiman’s lecture. My legs are lightly tired from the all-terrain walk, but in that way that reminds you that you have a body, strong and vital, to do with what you wish. The Berkeley breeze, every now and then, spirals coyly through the window, lifting notebook pages. As I return to my copy of Lolita, sitting in my stuffy childhood bedroom in Singapore, I am buoyed by the fresh gust of these memories. The sunshine. The proximity. But most importantly, through close reading of a text, I miss the willingness to hold something, and examine for its details. Let these details not slip away in a haze, like these past months have. This is to stay. Time to revel in a single piece.
