---
layout: post
title: "On Nabokov's "A Nursery Tale""
description: Your standard nursery tale about the power of numbers, orgies, and the Devil herself.
category: articles
date: 2020-07-06
tags: [essay]
image:
  feature: "https://cms.qz.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/sympathy-for-the-devil-featured.jpg?quality=75&strip=all&w=1600&h=900&crop=1"
---

In his essay “Good Writers and Good Readers,” Vladimir Nabokov alleges that all “major” writers embody three personas in their works: enchanter, storyteller, and teacher. Adhering to his own preaching, Nabokov should fulfill all three duties in “A Nursery Tale.” Yet while his storyteller’s art is apparent in the fast-paced and entertaining nature of Erwin’s hunt, and his prowess as an enchanter is well-demonstrated in his use of compelling language and imagery, Nabokov’s moral is not as easily grasped— an unexpected outcome, especially for a short story titled “A Nursery Tale.” Erwin’s deal with the Devil, and his weekend spent recruiting “slave girls,” does not end in disaster; it ends, instead, as every weekend typically ends: Erwin, dispirited, thinking about having to get up for work on Monday morning. Erwin does not experience any realization that his actions were wrong at the end of the story, nor does he express any commitment to change. The story gives no reassurance that the same events will not repeat the next weekend. Instead of a straightforward lesson about a young man being punished for two of the cardinal sins, lust and greed, Nabokov presents a much more nuanced message: fantasy, fueled by desire, leaves one where one began. By endearing readers to Erwin and his desires, as well as endowing the setting with fairytale characteristics, Nabokov demonstrates that to pursue desire alone traps one in an unfulfilling cycle, and to break from it, one must seek something higher and deeper: romantic love.

While Erwin’s actions are certainly immoral— engaging in a deal with the Devil, constantly leering at women from afar, and then actually collecting them, against their will, for an orgy— Nabokov goes to great lengths to present Erwin in a sympathetic light. A sensitive aside from the narrator, “We should bear in mind...”, discloses in confidentiality to the reader that the only other time Erwin has spoken to a woman was incredibly traumatic, his friends coercing him to “accost” her, and as a result, he has avoided conversation with “strange young ladies” ever since (161). The Devil also indicates that there is something special to Erwin’s combination of bold imagination and shyness, as he reminds her of an “innocent, though hugely endowed, young monk whom I knew in Tuscany” (164). Nabokov’s peculiar juxtaposition between the monk’s innocence and the Devil’s biblical “knowing” of his size points to Erwin’s own “mixed” condition. His desires are simultaneously debased and of some unknown virtue. Even the beginning sentence of the short story presents Erwin’s dirty fantasies in an ethereal, picturesque light: “Fantasy, the flutter, the rapture of fantasy!” (161). In doing this, Nabokov suffuses Erwin’s character with an air of exception; he is at once pure and filthy, contradicting reader’s expectations, to the effect of diluting any automatic aversion to Erwin’s perversities. While Nabokov wrote that the ability to identify with a story’s main character is not necessary in a reader, he constructs Erwin such that readers can slip into his desires, and almost feel as if they are their own.

To further mitigate Erwin’s obscene actions, Nabokov paints the story’s modern city setting in fairytale dimensions: “Happy, happy Erwin, to dwell in such a convenient, such a fairy-tale German town!” (161). The meta-structure of a fairy tale, with Erwin at its center, asserts that Erwin is just another character seeking a “happy ending.” The meeting with the Devil at the cafe, and the accompanying music, the Flower Aria from Faust, are references to just another narrative about a man wanting something more in life, classifying “A Nursery Tale” as just another entry in the long human repertoire of such stories (162). In response to the Devil’s offer of “innocent fun,” Erwin wistfully replies: “If it is all true, it would be a great happiness” (164). After collecting five women for his harem, Erwin returns to his room, and hears a tenor singing, “I want to be happee.” (168). Although the Devil recommended stopping at five, the fairy tale setting encourages readers to view Erwin’s greed and lust for more sex slaves as the hunt for life fulfillment, the search for happiness being a universal theme.

Besides characterizing Erwin as just another protagonist searching for happiness, Nabokov further ingratiates readers to Erwin’s desires by breaking the fourth wall. Describing how Erwin cannot bring himself to look at nearby, beautiful women, Nabokov writes that “the bones of his forehead—right here, over the eyebrows— ached from shyness,” fostering intimacy between reader, author, and character (161). The use of “here,” conjures the image of the narrator, pointing to his own head, a demonstration for the reader. The morning after Erwin accepts the Devil’s proposal, he doubts that the deal truly happened, and the narrator confides in the reader, “This rhetorical turn often occurs in fairy tales and, as in fairy tales, our young man soon realized he was wrong” (165). Erwin belongs to the reader, and suggests investment of the reader in Erwin and his quest. Later, when Erwin spies a woman accompanied by an unshaven man, Nabokov writes, “As she went by, now closely escorted by our ridiculous rival...” (166). The woman’s companion is not Erwin’s rival alone, he is our rival. The reader, sympathetic to Erwin’s hunt, his search for happiness, is inclined to want Erwin to succeed, as his desires are our desires. This effect, in combination with Nabokov’s intricate prose, the pace of the short story, and the amusing numbering system, results in readers half-yearning to see Erwin’s victorious orgy unfold.

The orgy never occurs, because as the Devil puts it: “Number thirteen turned out to be number one” (172). There will be no physical realization of Erwin’s harem. This event tragically lands him back to where he started. After collecting the twelfth girl, a young child, Erwin must return his count to an odd number. He mutters to himself: “I’ll pick up one on the way... I’m sure to find one!” (170) The repetition of “one” foreshadows the fact that the next woman Erwin pursues is one, woman number one. The first girl is also accompanied by the repeated motif of linden trees and their “ace-of-spades shadows,” a significant card for Nabokov to play, as aces can be both the first and the thirteenth rank, depending on the game. During the chase, Nabokov again turns to the phrase “mere fantasy, maybe, the flutter, the rapture of fantasy”—an almost exact repetition of the phrase that starts the story (171, 161). Through this repetition, Nabokov draws readers back to the beginning, suggesting that desire operates backwards, or in a cyclical pattern. To even further emphasize the cycle, Nabokov has the first girl say the same words told to Erwin by the only other girl with whom he has conversed, signifying an unmistakable return to Erwin’s origin story: “You ought to be ashamed of yourself. Leave me alone” (171).

Erwin’s desire remains unsatisfied, the iron gate of “paradise” slamming in his face. With the realization of the thirteenth girl being the first, the “walled garden” of women, promised to Erwin by the Devil, disintegrates. The Devil, from the inner confines of car, casually remarks that she is dying soon. She and Erwin exchange the same anticlimactic conclusion: “A pity” (172). This is the ending to a “frivolous weekend” (162). A Faustian deal with the devil ends in zero tragedy. The concluding sentence, “He walked with a heavy step, his legs ached, he was oppressed by the thought that tomorrow was Monday and it would be hard to get up,” whether interpreted as the ending of an erection, or just the emotions following the end of the weekend, and typical resentment towards returning to work, all indicate that Erwin’s behavior will likely not change (161). He will return to his usual unfulfilling process the next day, collecting his harem on the tram to and from work (161). But while he remains oblivious of being trapped in this cycle, readers can discern how the devious force of desire haunts his life, driving him in endless circles in search of a gratification that will never be fulfilled.

In today’s modern times, it might be said that people collect “harems” of their own, when amassing diverse sexual experiences. Nabokov suggests that true connection, in the form of romantic love, is the true object of desire, and one that will be most satisfying and fulfilling in people’s search for happiness. For Erwin, the first girl is presented as his romantic love, if he had only realized it. When he first encounters her, in a stunning moment of clarity, “He saw her so clearly, with such piercing and perfect force of perception, that, it seemed, nothing new about her features might have been disclosed by years of previous intimacy” (165). In that moment, it is as if Erwin has known this woman all his life. He describes the first girl as “the Maiden in White” (168). Nabokov suggests that this particular woman is Erwin’s beginning and end, a partner made to last. She is also dressed in white, conjuring images of wedding dresses. During the chase scene, the linden trees under streetlights cast down “the little black hearts of their shadows,” symbols of love literally surrounding the two of them (171).

In “A Nursery Tale,” Nabokov characterizes Erwin’s hunt as a search for happiness, one that will ultimately always be futile, as desire alone follows a cyclical pattern. Even though these pursuits may go unpunished, they will always leave one back where one has started. The endless circles of desire, the feeling of being incomplete, can be remedied only by the realization of romantic love.
